---
layout: wiki
title: Weekly log for 21 June 2026
published: true
date: 2026-06-21
parentURL: /weekly/
---

## Proof Assistant progress

I am still plugging away at trying to get a decision procedure for
Myo. Really, I don't care if it's tableaux or resolution or some other
method (I am vaguely aware there's some "fan rivalry" between the
advocates for these different methods, I just don't care about it).

### Sequent Calculi

Right now, I am trying to read Ron Dychkoff's "Contraction-free
sequent calculi for Intuitionistic logic" (_J. of Symbolic Logic_
**57** no.3 (1992) 795--807 [doi:10.2307/2275431](https://doi.org/10.2307/2275431)).

There's quite a bit of difference between natural deduction and
sequent calculus. Thankfully, Frank Pfenning's [Lecture Notes on Sequent Calculus](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~fp/courses/15317-f17/lectures/09-seqcalc.pdf)
clarifies a lot of implicit knowledge concerning sequents, like a
sequent $A_{1},\dots,A_{n}\Longrightarrow C$ should be interpreted as
"We can use $A_{1}$, ..., $A_{n}$ to verify $C$" (which was not
adequately communicated in any logic book I have read). Apparently, we
should think of sequent calculus as describing the _process of constructing_
a natural deduction proof.

The difficulty I am currently facing is trying to translate between
Sequent Calculus and Natural Deduction, so I could ostensibly use the
decision procedures formulated for Intuitionistic sequent calculi into
Myo. 

There's also a matter of terminology. Some rules have extra formulas
"swept under the rug" into the metavariable $\Gamma$ which remain the
same. These are apparently called the **"side formulae"** or **"context"**.
In the conclusion of each rule (i.e., "in the denominator"), the
formula which is not in the context is called the **"principal formula"**
(and it may appear on either side of the $\Longrightarrow$ metasymbol).

But for us to develop a proof procedure, it is particularly useful to
work with "invertible" rules (see Pfenning's [lecture notes](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~fp/courses/15317-s23/lectures/15-inversion.pdf)).

I am still wrestling with this (especially with generalizations to
first-order logic!), but I should note that Philip Zucker has a
[Python implementation](https://www.philipzucker.com/ljt/) of the
proof procedure for Intuitionistic sequent calculus.

### Tableaux-like procedures

I am making progress writing notes about the tableaux-like
(semi)decision procedure for Intuitionistic first-order logic,
specifically for handling "obvious" inferences. Although I learned a
lot from Intuitionistic sequent calculi (and gained a new appreciation
for viewing LCF goals as sequents), I feel like I am not going to end
up with a "genuine" tableaux method.

Instead, I will get something which "just works". 

Admittedly, I am comparing this to how, e.g., HOL Light's `ITAUT_TAC`
[is implemented](https://github.com/jrh13/hol-light/blob/4343a44dfece4757cd20037c6995922e4f59fe47/itab.ml#L59-L99)
(which is heavily inspired by Kleene's G3 proof procedure). The
propositional fragment resembles Philip Zucker's [Python implementation](https://www.philipzucker.com/ljt/),
modulo some differences which I think are inconsequential to
performance. 

I am trying to reconstruct the explanation just from my notes alone,
rather than relying on HOL Light's code, or Frank Pfenning's lecture
notes. Maybe I am a perfectionist, but I am unsatisfied with my
explanations thus far.

It's kind of amusing, I spent a little more than a year trying to
implement a toy Intuitionistic HOL as a metalogical framework, and got
bogged down with higher-order term rewriting. I abandoned that idea
around March 25 of this year, and I'm almost done implementing a
procedure to handle "obvious" inferences in first-order many-sorted
Intuitionistic logic.

### Avoiding sequent calculus

It dawned on me, while walking Thursday, that in LCF-style proof
assistants, goals _are_ sequents (in the sense of sequent calculus),
in the most literal sense.

However, I hope to avoid the laborious discussion of sequent calculi
when trying to explain the (semi)decision procedure for first-order
Intuitionistic logic, since...it's just too much. 

This made me wonder: could we "skip" the discussion of sequent
calculi, and just jump ahead to an expedited derivation directly with
goals and tactics?

### Substitutions

Along the way, I have realized I might need to implement a data
structure for substitutions. HOL Light calls them `instantiation`,
HOL4 calls them `subst`.

This would be necessary to support instantiating variables in a
theorem. I'd need a derived inference rule to support this (or else I
would need to add an inference rule to the kernel).

Without this, I would be in an unpleasant situation with implementing the
tableaux-like procedure in Myo...

### Next steps

I think the immediate next step will be to implement the tableaux-like
procedure for Myo.

After that, it is very tempting to now focus on implementing a
Mizar-like declarative proof syntax for Myo---albeit just a "poor
Mathematician's Mizar". This would allow me to write declarative
proofs which are human readable, stable against change, etc.

After that, I think the "obvious" candidate would be support for
definitions. This would require the implementation of a binary search
tree of some sort, but that should be straightforward.

## Migrating Forester to TeX

I am still plugging along migrating from Forester to plain TeX. I am
also writing notes in plain TeX. Right now, I have iii+78 pages
written (i.e., about 17 more pages written this week), mostly
dedicated to the sequent calculus of Intuitionistic 
first-order logic, the derivation of a (semi)decision for
Intuitionistic first-order logic, and some other minor random stuff.

## Reading

I have finished William King's _Skavenslayer_ and begun reading King's
_Daemonslayer_ before going to sleep. Despite dedicating less than an
hour a day to reading it, I am surprised how quickly I am getting
through it (even at a leisurely pace).

On a less frivolous source of reading, I have re-subscribed to 
_The New Yorker_. I received its June 15th issue, and am slowly
reading through [the profile](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2026/06/15/andrew-tates-empire-of-abuse) of Andrew Tate (a self-proclaimed 
rapist who has the ear of President Trump). It's just too horrifying
and disturbing to read in one sitting.