---
layout: wiki
title: Weekly log for 10 May 2026
published: true
date: 2026-05-10
---

I'm trying to keep a weekly log of "What I've been working on this week".
Let's see how long I can keep writing...

## Auditing courses

I've been auditing graduate Mathematics courses (algebraic geometry,
graduate topology, undergraduate analysis [to kill an hour of time],
and graduate abstract algebra) to think about
formalizing them in Mizar, what subtleties would occur, and so on.

I'm really intrigued with Riemannian geometry. We just discussed
Jacobi fields this past week. Although Mizar lacks the differential
topology and differential geometry "infrastructure" for Jacobi fields,
I think they should be straightforward to formalize.

Initially I thought Algebraic Geometry may be good to formalize in
Mizar, plus it'd give me a chance to think about relating Algebraic
Geometry to Differential Geometry. But I found out Algebraic Geometry
is really just commutative algebra on steroids, with trace amounts of
geometry sprinkled in for flavoring. 

## Out of books

I've run out of books to read when going to bed. I finished Elaine
Cunningham's "Starlight and Shadows" trilogy (which I thought was
quite good, I'm not sure how I feel about the ending).

I'm trying to read Douglas Adams' _Hitchiker's Guide to the Galaxy_.
It feels unbelievable---someone working at a radio station _owns a home_?
That could never happen if they saved up working a dozen
lifetimes. But this was apparently commonplace in Adams' day...

I don't think I can finish _Hitchiker's Guide_, but I'm out of books,
so...

## Myo: The Proof Assistant

I have just announced last Saturday (May 2)
[Myo](https://codeberg.org/pqnelson/myo) the  proof assistant. It's a
metalogical framework, heavily inspired by
[Isabelle](https://isabelle.in.tum.de/).

The foundations for Myo is Intuitionistic first-order logic plus
Feferman's [FS0](https://math.stanford.edu/~feferman/papers/presentedlogics.pdf).
In some sense, it might be tempting (but wrong) to think of Myo as 
"Hilbert's programme as a proof assistant". Instead, I am trying to
investigate the "design space" for Mizar-like proof
assistants. Metalogical frameworks are designed for these sorts of
endeavours ("exploring the design space" and "proving results about
the design").

### Literate program

Myo is a literate program implemented using [Noweb](https://www.cs.tufts.edu/~nr/noweb/). I am tempted to
implement my own literate programming framework (since this _is_ a
part of the Yak Shavers' Guild, the Yak Shaving must continue!). For
now, I am content to use Noweb.

This is not a great example of literate programming, in my opinion. It
assumes the reader is, well, just me. First, I'd need to identify my
target audience.

If I wanted to target, say, pure Mathematicians, then I'd need to
include a lot more motivating material (which I just don't have the
energy for, at the moment).

Eventually, I suspect I will build my own literate programming
framework, and I am incredibly tempted to use my own
[poor man's LaTeX]({% link _posts/2025-12-27-poor-man-latex.md %})
atop plain TeX for stability. One task at a time...

### Unit Tests

Last Tuesday, I added the unit testing framework. It's a simple
xUnit-style framework for writing unit tests in Standard ML. 

I've been writing unit tests for the tactics, and caught a subtle bug
in the `Tactic.disch` function when applied to a negated goal.

I foolishly have followed the HOL community's `DISCH_TAC` to transform
a negated goal `Gamma ?- ~A` into `A,Gamma ?- False`. The validation
function had a bug in it for this particular case. Fortunately, I
caught it using unit tests.

So it's already paying off, but I should continue working on this.

### Definition principles

I want to get to supporting definitions in Myo. This requires
implementing a binary search tree (of some kind) and thinking through
the definition principles for Intuitionistic first-order logic.

There are two things we can define in first-order logic: predicates
and terms. Predicates are easier to define, they end up looking like:

> Let $x_{1}$, ..., $x_{n}$ be terms. We define the predicate
> $P[x_{1},\dots,x_{n}]$ to be the formula $\phi$.

In Mizar, a "definitional-theorem" is produced essentially of the form
"$\forall x_{1},\dots, x_{n}\ldotp P[x_{1}, \dots, x_{N}]\iff\phi$". 

Terms are trickier, because we need to prove existence and
uniqueness. Sometimes. If we have an "abbreviation"-type definition
("The term T equals [expression]"), then it's already well-defined and
we don't need to do anything.

However, the other way to define a term is "Let $t_{1}$, ..., $t_{k}$
be terms. The term $T(t_{1},\dots,t_{k})$ means the
object satisfying formula $\phi$". In this situation, we need to prove two things:

1. Existence: there really does exist at least one object satisfying
   the formula. Formally, $\exists t\ldotp \phi[t_{1},\dots,t_{k},t]$
2. Uniqueness: if there are two objects satisfying the same condition,
   then they must be equal to each other. Formally,
   $\forall u_{1}, u_{2}\ldotp (\phi[t_{1},\dots,t_{k},u_{1}]\land\phi[t_{1},\dots,t_{k},u_{2}])\implies u_{1}=u_{2}$.

In Mizar, we would then admit a "definitional-theorem" of the form:
$\forall t_{1},\dots,t_{k}\ldotp\phi[t_{1},\dots,t_{k},T(t_{1},\dots,t_{k})]$.

Fortunately, there's little _logical_ difficulty in these
principles. It's just a matter of coding it up.

**Aside:** Feferman asserts that every Class-sorted term $A$ has a
corresponding characteristic function-sorted term $c_{A}$ defined by
$c_{A}(a)=0$ if $a\in A$ and $c_{A}(x)=1$ if $x\notin A$. But this
does not seem possible to construct using the axioms alone. We can
construct the class-sorted term $C:=\\{(x,b)\mid (x\in A\land b=0)\lor(x\notin A\land b=1)\\}$
and $C\cap\pi_{1}^{-1}\{x\}=\\{(x,b)\\}$. There is no obvious way to get
a function-sorted term from this, however.

### Detour on binary search trees

However, actually writing code to maintain the "database" or
"dictionary" of definitions is a bit distracting. I have compiled _a lot_
of notes over the years, and I'm just using them all when writing Myo. 
So I've written 8 pages in a day on binary trees just from these
accumulated notes.

At any rate, I need to pick _one_ binary search tree data structure. I
don't need to document all the binary search tree data structures I
ever encountered and show how to implement them (although that would
be fun). I only need one.

### Future steps with Myo

I'm still deliberating over what to do next with Myo. There are
several obvious paths in the short run:

- Finish writing unit tests for tactics (not to get to "100%
  coverage", but just to test they work as expected...and to form some
  crude user-documentation)
- Implement "tacticals" (functions which operate on tactics, like
  "repeatedly apply this tactic until it fails", or "apply tactic A
  but if it fails then apply tactic B instead", etc.)
- Implement "conversion" and "conversional" functions for term
  rewriting
- Implement a binary search tree and continue to implement definitions

The long run, there are many different things we could do:

- Formalize the [Definition of Standard ML](https://smlfamily.github.io/sml97-defn.pdf)
  and create a code generator (and a verification library)
- Formalize Intuitionistic three-sorted first-order logic + FS0
- Formalize Mizar-like proof assistants for classical first-order
  logic + some axiomatic ZF-like set theory.

There are even intermediate steps to consider, which are "bigger" than
the short-run concerns but "smaller" than these long-run ideas:

- Formalize Talcott's [Theory of Binding](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/030439759390240T)
  as a library for Myo
- Since FS0 is inspired by Lisp, implement a "Lisp REPL" for Myo
  object logics. This could quickly become a rabbit hole (do we
  support macros? Reader macros? Can we prove the correctness for
  these things?)
- ["Dogfooding it"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eating_your_own_dog_food). I sense there are a lot of things I'm working on
  (with Myo) which can be formalized _using_ Myo.

Actually, one thing I am trying to maintain with the literate program
is a sort of "linearity constraint": the code from sections 1, 2, ...,
N should compile together and form a runnable program (even if it
lacks a lot of features). "Dogfooding it" may produce a situation
which violates this constraint.
