---
layout: wiki
title: Weekly log for 5 July 2026
published: true
date: 2026-07-05
parentURL: /weekly/
---

Most of this week was spent reading about linguistics, thinking about
literate programs, and emailing people.

## Proof Assistant progress

What little time I spent on Myo, I spent editing the prose of the
literate program. I pushed in several changes, nothing major. The
literate program is now 170 pages long.

Oh, I caught a "bug" in my Makefile. I'm trying to make it
POSIX-compliant, so I am checking it against `bmake` and [`pdpmake`](https://github.com/rmyorston/pdpmake).
The latter caught a bug: it's illegal to write something like `.PHONY: %.nw`
a phony rule with a wildcard.

### A "Digital Intuitionism"

I think Dan Ingalls's [Design Principles Behind Smalltalk](https://www.cs.virginia.edu/~evans/cs655/readings/smalltalk.html)
([pdf](https://gwern.net/doc/cs/1981-ingalls.pdf))
plays into Brouwer's "second act of Intuitionism" (when viewing
Brouwer's "second act" as a hypothetical Mathematician "growing" their
knowledge-base) if we turn Brouwer's "second act" into a
dialogue. This isn't a novel idea, Paul Lorenzen came up with this
idea in the 1950s or '60s --- it ultimately led to Jaakko Hintikka's
["game theoretic semantics"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Game_semantics) 
for Intuitionistic logic.

But what about doing this dialogue with a proof assistant? That
describes my underlying hope/intention with Myo, since it is
formalizing the metatheory for a logic. This is also a nod to
Hilbert's programme using Finitism as the metatheory. 

I have much to say about this, you'll just have to "stay tuned" to
read more about it in _Myo: The Program_.

### More polish to the introductory text

I am unsatisfied with my introductory text as motivating the rest of
the literate program. It's "fine", and could even stand alone as a
decent piece of writing.

But it is not a good introduction to the _literate program_. 

I need to discuss the _design_ of the program, the _architecture_ of
the proof assistant. I should include some diagrams showing the
important parts (components?) of Myo, and I should "zoom in" on the
kernel. 

### More results proven

I proved some theorems establishing the logical equivalence of
different ways to define the uniqueness quantifier
\begin{equation}
\vdash(\exists!x\ldotp A[x])\iff(\exists x\ldotp A[x]\land\forall y(A[y]\implies x=y))
\end{equation}
and
\begin{equation}
\vdash(\exists!x\ldotp A[x])\iff(\exists x\ldotp A[x])\land(\forall x,y\ldotp A[x]\land A[y]\implies x=y).
\end{equation}
I was surprised I was able to prove these logical equivalences
Intuitionistically. (To be fair, I am _always_ surprised whenever I
can prove _anything_ Intuitionistically...)

That's going to be useful when I get to implementing definitional
mechanisms.

## Notes migration

I think I have reached a point where I don't need to migrate any more
from the Yak Shavers' Guild's forester notes to plain TeX --- the
migration is "complete-ish". 

Right now, it is iii+106 pages long (about 16 pages more than last week).

## Literate Programming

### Investigating "top-down exposition"

Re-reading the manual for `WEB`, I realized I have not adequately
appreciated Dijkstra's "top-down exposition". In [EWD788](https://www.cs.utexas.edu/~EWD/transcriptions/EWD07xx/EWD788.html),
Dijkstra writes:

> Programs are now usually presented in the so-called “top-to-bottom” or “top-down” fashion. There are good reasons for this. Programs have to bridge the gap between the problems and the tools; whereas the programming languages that provide their building blocks have been very stable — some would even argue: depressingly so — the general-purpose nature of the tool is faithfully reflected in the diversity of the problems to be solved. Top-down presentation presents first what is specific and unfamiliar, thereby providing the framework in which the later details fit. (This also explains why hardware designers, who over the last decades had the diversity at the side of their building blocks, tend to prefer the so-called “bottom-up” presentation.)

I turned to Dijkstra's "Notes on Structured Programming" ([EWD249](https://www.cs.utexas.edu/~EWD/transcriptions/EWD02xx/EWD249/EWD249.html))
for another example of "top-down exposition". I realized I had not
appreciated the essay before now, especially his discussion of
"Pearls" and iterative refinement of "descriptions" of programs.

### Top-down design but implement bottom-up

I was thinking about what Bob Nystrom told me, namely juggling the
competing concerns of: 

- Avoid large-scale cyclic dependencies, minimize "forward declarations" of concepts. I took this to mean that ideally in chapter _N_, you should rely on everything from previous chapters and nothing from future chapters. In particular, this means you should build your program using bottom-up coding.
- Explain things top/down at the chapter or section level. If you code bottom-up, readers don't understand why you're doing it. This requires explaining to them the big picture, which motivates the code.

Knuth writes in ["Literate programming"](http://www.literateprogramming.com/knuthweb.pdf)
(_The Computer J._ **27** no.2 (1984) 97--111; see §J):

> When I first began to work with the ideas that eventually became the `WEB` system, I thought that I would be designing a language for "top-down" programming, where a top-level description is given first and successively refined. On the other hand I knew that I often created major parts of programs in a "bottom-up" fashion, starting with the definitions of basic procedures and data structures and gradually building more and more powerful subroutines.

(I quote Knuth because I don't think I have seen a clearer description
of bottom-up programming.)

After mulling it over, I had to ask myself, "Am I explaining things
top/down? Am I writing bottom/up?" If I am honest, I am unsatisfied
with my explanations, and it forced me to re-examine my notes on
literate programming, etc.

### Emailing Shreevatsa for thoughts

I reached out to Shreevatsa R. to discuss literate programming, and
specifically to see whether I quoted Shreevatsa accurately in
describing _TeX: The Program_ as "organized bottom-up" but
"implemented top-down". (It turns out, I _did_ quote Shreevatsa correctly!)

I feel like there's _more_ to literate programming than I realize, and
I am just "holding it the wrong way". But Shreevatsa is equally
fascinated with literate programming and has much insight to share,
which I eagerly hope to hear.

## Reading

I spent most of this past week reading Hjelmslev's _Prolegomena_ and
parts of Carnap's _Logical Syntax of Language_.

Hjelmslev's book is interesting, for a variety of reasons. Ultimately,
I think, the cornerstone to his entire philosophical perspective may
be summed up in the passage (page 39, emphasis Hjelmslev's):

> A process and a system that belongs to it ("lies behind it") together contract a function, which, depending on the point of view, may be conceived as a relation or as a correlation. A closer investigation of this function soon shows us that it is a determination in which the system is the constant: _the process determines the system_. The decisive point is not the superficial relationship consisting in the fact that the process is the more immediately accessible for observation, while the system must be "ordered to" the process---"discovered" behind it by means of a procedure---and so is only mediately knowable insofar as it is not presented to us on the basis of a previously performed procedure. This superficial relationship might make it seem that the process can exist without a system but not vice versa. But the decisive point is that the existence of a system is a necessary premiss for the existence of a process: the process comes into existence by virtue of a system's being present behind it, a system which governs and determines it in its possible development. A process is unimaginable---because it would be in an absolute and irrevocable sense inexplicable---without a system lying behind it. On the other hand, a system is not unimaginable without a process; the existence of a system does not presuppose the existence of a process. The system does not come into existence by virtue of a process's being found.

In particular, "the process determines the system." This is germane
for keeping a Zettelkasten together, since you have "the Zettelkasten method"
and the physically tangible "Zettelkasten" (consisting of slips in a box).

For Hjelmslev, "process" is a text being studied (possibly a sentence,
a paragraph, an essay, a book, or entire corpus) and "system" is the
language.