---
layout: wiki
title: Weekly log for 19 July 2026
published: true
date: 2026-07-19
parentURL: /weekly/
---

It feels like the Internet has been markedly worse over the past month
or two, both in quality and with interactions with other people on
forums (or social media).

## Lie Miz progress

I have resumed proving properties about perfect groups. Tuesday I
spent time thinking about slicker proofs that perfect groups are
quotient-closed and join-closed.

By "quotient-closed", I mean: for any perfect group $G$, for any
normal subgroup $N$ of $G$, the quotient group $G/N$ is perfect.

By "join-closed", I mean: for any group $G$, for any perfect subgroups
$H_{1}$ and $H_{2}$ of $G$, their join --- which is the subgroup
generated by the union of their elements $\langle H_{1}\cup H_{2}\rangle$ --- is perfect.

I have proven perfect groups are quotient-closed on Tuesday, and
thought more about join-closed.

I fear perfect groups may spiral "out of control" and form its own
article. 

## Notes progress

I'm continuing to work on notes for the Yak Shavers' Guild.

### Induction proofs in <span>$FS_{0}$</span>

A chapter of the notes consists of theorems and informal proofs about
$FS_{0}$ and I realized I had a section (on natural numbers) with
invalid induction proofs. Informally, they all look like:

> **Claim**: (Let $P[-]$ be a property of natural numbers.) For all natural
> numbers $n$ we have $P[n]$ holds.
>
> **Proof**: By induction. We see $P[0]$ by (reasoning).
>
> The inductive case: assume $P[n]$. Then (reasoning) gives us $P[n+1]$.
>
> Hence the claim.

The problem? Well, induction in $FS_{0}$ works on _class-sorted terms_
***not predicates***. 

Are we doomed? No, it turns out that we have class-comprehension on
<span>$\Sigma^{1}_{0}$</span> formulas, so we can do induction on
proofs for <span>$\Sigma^{1}_{0}$</span> formulas.

### Primitive Recursive Arithmetic

I have also transcribed some 17 theorems from Skolem's original paper on
primitive recursive arithmetic, translating them into the language of
<span>$FS_{0}$</span>. 

This is when I realized the "error" in induction proofs I just
mentioned. 

I should prove more properties about the [monus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monus) operator
`-'` like:

- `a + (b -' a) = b + (a -' b)`
- `(a -' b) -' c = a -' (b + c)`
- `a -' a = 0`

### Lists (a.k.a., "finite sequences")

Statically-typed functional programming languages speak of `list`
types, Feferman's <span>$FS_{0}$</span> speaks of "finite sequences". 

I'm sticking with the statically-typed functional programmer's terminology.

So far, I am making sure that I have sketched the definitions and
formalizations of the primitive recursive operations as found in,
e.g., Isabelle/HOL's [List library](https://isabelle.in.tum.de/library/HOL/HOL/List.html).

I've defined the `foldr` and `foldl` functions. These are,
unsurprisingly, primitive recursive functions. I should prove the
various "fusion laws" (and whatnot) which Richard Bird & Oege de Moor
proven in _Algebra of Programming_ (Prentice Hall, 1997). These laws
were first introduced in:

- Richard S. Bird.
  "Algebraic Identities for Program Calculation".
  _Computer Journal_ **32** (1989) 122--126.
  [doi:10.1093/comjnl/32.2.122](https://doi.org/10.1093/comjnl/32.2.122)

Bird defines `concat = foldr (++) []`.
The laws I should prove:

1. Map promotion law: `(map f) . concat = concat . (map (map f))`
   (I have proven `(map f) . (++) = (++) . (juxt (map f) (map f))`)
2. Fold promotion law: if `mu` is associative with identity element `a`, then
   `(foldl mu a) . concat = (foldl mu a) . (map (foldl mu a))`
3. Fold-map fusion law: `(foldl mu a) . (map f) = foldl alpha a`
   where `alpha` is a binary operator defined by the equation
   `beta(b, x) = mu(b, f(x))`

The fold promotion law has a generalization where we permit `mu` to be
nonassociative and we do not require `a` to be its identity
element. Then we get: `(foldl mu a) . concat = foldl otimes a` where
we define `otimes(u, x) = foldl mu u x`.

Apparently the fold-map fusion law was introduced as the "reduce-map rule" in Wadler's
"Applicative style programming, program transformation, and list
operators" (_Reports of the ACM Conference on Functional Programming
Languages and Computer Architectures_ (1981), pp.25--32).

### Taking and dropping elements of a list

I have defined `drop n xs` and `take n xs` functions, which are also
primitive recursive. But they are more complicated than you might think.

Why? Well, <span>$FS_{0}$</span> requires a certain "template" for
primitive recursion, something like:

> Let $f$ and $g$ be [primitive recursive] functions.
> The function $h$ is defined by primitive recursion as
> $h0=0$ and $\forall x[h(x,0)=f(x)]$ and $\forall x,y,z[h(x,(y,z))=g(x,y,z,h(x,y),h(x,z))]$.

You can also prove the derived result that you can define a primitive
recursive function, say, $k$ from $f$ and $g$ by $k(0,x)=f(x)$ and
$k((y,z),x)=g(x,y,z,k(y,x),k(z,x))$ --- so there is some "freedom" in
which argument is used for primitive recursion.

Then we can define `drop_last n xs` to drop the last `n` elements from
a list, which is tricky to define. I have basically offered the
following:

```
drop_last_one [] = []
drop_last_one [x] = []
drop_last_one (x::xs) = x::(drop_last_one xs)

drop_last 0 xs = xs
drop_last (Succ n) xs = drop_last_one (drop_last n xs)
```

Observe that `drop_last` is well-defined by the primitive recursive
templates, but if we tried `drop_last (Succ n) xs =drop_last n (drop_last_one xs)`
then it fails to fit one of the templates.

Then we can offer the following (highly un-intuitive) definition for
`take n xs` as:

```
take n xs = drop_last (length(xs) -' n) xs
```

where `m -' n = max(0, m - n)` is the ["monus"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monus) operation
(Unicode: U+2238 &#8760;).

You might think there should be a better way to define `take n xs`,
but it is tricky. Isabelle/HOL [defines](https://isabelle.in.tum.de/library/HOL/HOL/List.html#List.take|const) `take` as:

```
(* Isabelle/HOL *)
primrec take:: "nat ⇒ 'a list ⇒ 'a list" where
take_Nil:"take n [] = []" |
take_Cons: "take n (x # xs) = (case n of 0 ⇒ [] | Suc m ⇒ x # take m xs)"
```

This is perfectly well-defined for a sufficiently smart system like
Isabelle. But <span>$FS_{0}$</span> is not as clever as Isabelle. The
problem? You cannot (in <span>$FS_{0}$</span>) have the primitive
recursive call with modified parameters like `dec n` --- that is to
say, you must use either `take n x` or `take n xs` or both, but not
`take (dec n) xs`. Is this not primitive recursive? It _is_ primitive
recursive, but as I said <span>$FS_{0}$</span> is not as clever as Isabelle.

I am hoping to prove the theorems in <span>$FS_{0}$</span> that:

```
(* FS0 using Mizar language *)
theorem
  for A being set
  for xs being List of A st xs = []
  for n being Nat
  holds take n xs = [];

theorem
  for n being Nat
  for A being set
  for x being Element of A
  for xs being List of A
  holds (n = 0 implies take n (x::xs) = [])
      & (ex m being Nat st n = Succ m & take n (x::xs) = x::(take m xs));
```

## Distractions

### CSS for <code>&lt;kbd&gt;</code> element

I discovered I do not have a CSS styling for the <code>&lt;kbd&gt;</code>
element, so I got side-tracked on Friday morning trying to get
something nice and simple working.

### Terminal emulators

I got distracted with my terminal emulator. (I found [this useful comparison of emulators](https://blog.randomstring.org/2025/09/26/a-comparison-of-terminal-emulators/),
even though I ultimately chose to try `xterm` and the tabbed utility.)
I thought about switching to `xterm` because it is fast and barely uses RAM.

I am amazed with how fast `xterm` is to start up, and how responsive
it is. It was noticeable compared to `uxrvt`.

**Copy text.**
Thus far, I have managed to add the ability to copy from xterm by
adding to `~/.Xresources` the line:

```
XTerm.vt100.selectToClipboard: true
```

Running the command `xrdb -merge ~/.Xresources` will update the
configuration _in a new xterm_.

**Pasting text.** This is supported by the <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>Insert</kbd>
keyboard commands, or the middle mouse button.

**But no tabs.** There is no native "tab support", so I was a bit
disappointed by that. The [consensus](https://unix.stackexchange.com/q/212184/24499)
seems to be to use GNU screens, which does not actually solve the problem...

An [alternative solution](https://askubuntu.com/a/565465) would be to
install `sudo apt-get install suckless-tools`, then run `tabbed -c xterm -into &`.
That is to say, use the "tabbed" utility.

The tabbed utility is neat:
- <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>Return</kbd> opens a new tab
- <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>j</kbd> opens the tab to
  the left
- <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>k</kbd> opens the tab to
  the right
- <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>q</kbd> closes a tab

**Updating FVWM config file.** I have decided to give it a shot, and
updated my FVWM config file to add to the menu:

```
Test (x tabbed) + "&XTerm%icons/terminal.png%" Exec exec tabbed -c xterm -into
```

This will allow me to use `xterm` within the tabbed utility.

#### Ghostty

Somehow I was recommended to try [ghostty](https://ghostty.org/), a
terminal emulator written in Zig. Unfortunately, installing Zig on my
Ubuntu 24.04 LTS is problematic, so this would require a huge
diversion.

#### Zutty

This was the next recommendation after Ghostty. So I tried `sudo
apt-get install zutty` (version 0.14.8), waited, then tried it out. 

I got an error:

```
E [charvdev.cc:277] Error: Compiling fragment shader:
0:1(10): error: GLSL ES 3.10 is not supported. Supported versions are: 1.00 ES

terminate called after throwing an instance of 'std::system_error'
  what():  Resource deadlock avoided
```

Well, damn...I shouldn't be surprised a C++ project using OpenGL would
be buggy.

## "Canon" of source code to read?

I have been thinking about something Guy Steele said in an interview
in the book _Coders at Work_, something to the effect of, "We don't
really have a canon of source code programs for people to read." (Not
in the same way that we have a 'canon' of English literature to read.)

What would be a good "canon" for people who want to learn how to
program?

I think something we do not appreciate is that Computer Science
education is (or, was) rather cleverly designed:
- You learn how to program in C
- You implement data structures in C
- You build a C compiler using the data structure library from your
  previous course
- You study an operating system in C using data structures from your
  library, which you can compile using the C compiler you implemented

The important point is how the courses _build directly on earlier courses_.
This "accretion" quite cleverly cements the topics discussed.

Ostensibly, you could add a few more courses to build more tools to
help modernize the "regimen": a unit testing framework, a distributed
version control system, an interpreter with a garbage collector, and
so on. But let us ignore this for a moment, and return to the question
of "canon". 

What would be a good "canon" of source code for people to read among
these categories?

- C Compiler
  - I have not found a C compiler whose source code I would say is
    "pleasant to read", perhaps [chibicc](https://github.com/rui314/chibicc)?
- Operating systems
  - xv6 is really pleasant to read and simple
  - I am told Minix 2 is similarly simple and pleasant

**Remark.** A valid criticism for this "programme" is that it leans
heavily on one programming language (namely, C). This isn't always
good. A student should learn several programming languages. (End of Remark)

### Is "Make yourself an X" a good way to teach? Or learn?

I also wonder if "Make yourself an X" is a good way to learn computer
science? Or teach it?

After all, we can form an abstraction around various tools and parts
of the computer to avoid worrying about their implementation. We
program and reason at the level of these abstractions (or at a higher level).
That's _intentional_ --- CPUs are _designed_ to be blackboxes which
can be viewed as an "interpreter for some structured programming language":
I don't have to worry about which jump instructions are executed when
an if-statement is compiled. The compiler will translate it
faithfully, and the computer will execute it as expected.

"Make yourself an X" intentionally breaks this abstraction.

Is that _always_ a good thing?

I think it is good to break this abstraction at least once in your
lifetime, to avoid treating it like magic.

### Other possible programmes?

I think another possible programme is to work in a completely
different direction:

- Teach introductory programming with Standard ML (like CMU CS15-150)
- Data structures with Standard ML
- Interpreters using Standard ML (and the data structures you have
  already implemented)
  - Virtual machines (like CAM, SECD, G-machine, etc.) using Standard ML
  - You can easily construct a "Standard ML to [virtual machine]"
    compiler at this point
  - CPUs as "just another virtual machine", and Assembly language as its
    language --- then you can implement virtual machines using assembly
    code as part of the pipeline
- Implementing proof assistants using Standard ML
- Use the proof assistant (that you just implemented) to specify and
  implement circuits and CPUs
- ...and so on.

This leaves out some of the material covered in the "C approach"
(e.g., operating systems).

### What kinds of software should be implemented?

This is another tough question, what sorts of computer programs should
be implemented in this educational programme? What about:

- More tools used daily, like:
  - Text editors
  - IDEs
  - Linters
  - Debugging tools
  - Build systems
  - Unit testing frameworks
  - Version control systems
- Shells and terminal emulators
- Web servers
- Databases
- Interpreters
  - Smalltalk-style object oriented systems
  - Garbage collectors
- Numerical analysis of any kind
- Posix-style p-threads --- more generally, _any_ concurrency-related
  data structures
- [GOFAI](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GOFAI)
- Machine learning?
- Video games (even just Rogue-likes or text adventures)
- GUIs and graphics heavy software

And I am confident I am forgetting many things.

Can all of this be covered in an undergraduate education? Yes, I think
so, since the [Principia Softwarica](https://principia-softwarica.org/)
tries to do something like this with Plan 9 from Bell Labs, which
should be about 15830 pages of printed text (both code and
explanation). This _sounds_ daunting but requires understanding only
205,081 lines of code. The heuristic I am told is that 100k lines of
code requires 2-4 months to comprehend, so extrapolating to 200k lines
of code should take around 4-8 months to comprehend such a codebase. 

Is this realistic? Well, xv6 consists of about 10k lines of code, and
it is covered in one course in one quarter at MIT. Linear extrapolation
suggests 200k lines of code could be discussed in 20 courses. Since
3-4 courses is considered a "full load" for a quarter, this would be
5-7 quarters worth of material (between 1 and 2 academic years).
That's literally a major's worth of courses.

## Reading

I'm in the middle of William King's _Dragonslayer_. 

I have read a little bit of random papers here and there, but nothing
which left an impression.

Oh, but I did stumble across Joel Jakubovic, Jonathan Edwards, and
Tomas Petricek's "Technical Dimensions of Programming Systems"
([arXiv:2302.10003](https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.10003)) which was
fascinating, since there are so few papers about "systems" (like
Smalltalk or Lisp).