---
layout: wiki
title: Weekly log for 17 May 2026
published: true
date: 2026-05-17
---

## Proof assistant stuff

There are a few things I want to work on next with Myo:

1. Finish unit testing tactics
2. Implement definitions (this would require implementing a binary
   search tree, of some kind)
3. Implement conversions for rewriting

Like a donkey caught equidistant between three bales of hay, I find
myself starving to death.

### Progress with unit tests and tactics

I have added more unit tests to Myo, specifically checking the tactics
work by re-deriving results from `derived.sml`.

Surprisingly, I caught a few bugs this way! That's great news!

This tells me I should continue writing unit tests, but I am easily
distracted. 

### Definition-by-cases issues

Feferman claims characteristic functions exist in $FS_{0}$, but I
cannot prove it. Certainly, it does not follow from the axioms. I
think we need definition-by-cases. I think this follows from the usual
definitional principle for terms in first-order logic, but I'm having
difficulty proving it. 

I spent this week fruitlessly thinking about definition-by-cases. I
noticed that Mizar does something like:
\begin{equation}
\frac{\vdash(C\implies\exists x\ldotp A[x])\land(\neg C\implies\exists x\ldotp B[x]),\qquad\vdash\forall x,y\ldotp P[x]\land P[y]\implies x=y}{\vdash\exists!x\ldotp P[x]}
\end{equation}
Several undergraduates were interested in the problem I was trying to
solve.

I gave a brief 30-minute talk about the background to this problem,
how it came about. Most of this was about the basic concepts of
$FS_{0}$, metalogical frameworks, inductively-defined judgements as a
suitable approximation of "deductive systems", and so on.

### Abandoning forester

I have decided to stop using Forester for notes about Myo and proof
assistants. Forester was too unstable, and it was too difficult to
migrate to Forester 5.

Instead, I have migrated to plain TeX with my "poor man's LaTeX"
macros. I don't think I'll make my notes public, but I have written a
bit about "poor man's LaTeX" elsewhere. Briefly, it's a minimal subset
of LaTeX macros to support environments, counters, links, and very
little else. 

Since I'm writing a bunch of "numbered paragraphs" (like
Allen U. Kennington's [Differential Geometry Reconstructed](http://www.geometry.org/tex/conc/dg.html)),
these macros are "good enough".

Plain TeX has the advantage of longevity and stability. I know 1000
years from now (if humans have not killed themselves off), this TeX
will compile just fine. I could not say the same thing about Forester.

## Reading

I had to stop reading Douglas Adams's _Hitchiker's Guide to the Galaxy_.
It was just too tedious to read.

I've been reading Salvatore's Icewind Dale trilogy on the commute to
Caltech and back. Well, I finished the first book, and just started
_Streams of Silver_ Friday.

Before bed, I am re-reading the Gotrek & Felix omnibus (volume I).