---
layout: wiki
title: Weekly log for 24 May 2026
published: true
date: 2026-05-24
---

## Ditch day

Last Friday was Caltech's "ditch day". Caltech's undergraduates are
organized into "houses" (the dormitories where they reside), and
seniors plan an elaborate scavanger hunt for ditch day. Each house has
its own independent scavanger hunt.

This year, one house had themed its ditch day around "the amazing
race": people in the house formed teams of 3 or so, then used the
clues to find where they were supposed to race off to.

On the bus ride home, I ran into one "amazing race" team. I offered
them help, they were trying to get to Echo Park. They got off at Del
Mar station, and took the subway to Lincoln/Cypress station. I wonder
how they fared?

Like Mark Twain in _A Tramp Abroad_, I found myself (by random chance)
cheering on one particular team, and I wish them well.

## Proof assistant stuff

Since Friday was "ditch day" at Caltech, I outlined material I wanted
to edit, add, or revise in the literate program for Myo.

Again, I am working on it slowly.

### Decidable equality

I've also been bogged down with Intuitionistic logic and decidable
equality. (The Devil take this Intuitionism!) "Decidable equality"
means we have the theorem $\vdash\forall x,y\ldotp(x=y\lor x\neq y)$. 

I believe (thanks to $FS_{0}$ induction on the universe axiom), we can
prove equality is decidable for individual-sorted terms in
$FS_{0}$...but I have not proven it. I would like to say, "And I will
get to it this week!" But I cannot, I suspect I will be bogged down
with a lot of distractions. 

I mean, I should be able to prove this claim _using_ Myo.

In general, identity is not a decidable binary relation in
Intuitionistic logic (c.f., top of page 16 of this
[PDF](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~fp/courses/atp/cmuonly/SFH89.pdf)). 

### Tactics

I have not been able to dedicate adequate time to tactics. I suspect I
will have to add a "kludge" `Tactic.exists_elim` which corresponds to
the `Thm.exists_elim` inference rule, rather than figure out how to
use `Tactic.choose` properly.

## Note taking migration

I am in the middle of migrating from Forester to plain TeX.

During this process, I am also adding more notes about $FS_{0}$ set
theory.

### "Agile" note-taking

This has made me ponder a bit more about Luhmann's Zettelkasten. I
think one critical aspect which people neglect is that a ZK is an
"agile" note-taking system: you "live" in it.

In particular, you should "wander" through it, revisiting old threads,
and thinking about new material to add.

I thought about writing something about this to post to the
`/r/zettelkasten` subreddit, but I don't think anyone would be
interested. 

I'm not sure if what I'm doing qualifies as a Zettelkasten, per se. 

### Luhmann's Zettelkasten

I've been arguing with myself about the importance of
autopoiesis in Luhmann's Zettelkasten system, and I keep talking
myself into the opposite position I held the day before.

I can see the argument _in favor_ of it, and _against_ it.

However, I think that Luhmann's theory of communication (particularly
the role "understanding" plays) turns out to be important in
understanding his note-taking methodology.

### Patching TeX macros

I have patched my `\label` macro to write to the `.aux` file. I'm not
sure how I feel about this, the old macros ensures a "linear ordering"
(which is not what you want with a Zettelkasten!).

## Reading

I finished R.A. Salvatore's _Streams of Silver_ yesterday
(Saturday). It was amusing enough. I will start _The Halfling's Gem_
probably this Wednesday.

I have noticed I am not going to bed as early, so I am not reading as
much before sleeping. By this I mean, I am going to bed at 7pm instead
of 6pm, so it's just one hour less of reading.