---
layout: wiki
title: Weekly log for 12 July 2026
published: true
date: 2026-07-12
parentURL: /weekly/
---

## Lie Miz progress

The "Lie Miz" project is the unfunded, volunteer coordinated effort to
formalize Lie theory in Mizar. Sebastian Koch has formalized Algebras
over rings, and I formalized the general linear group. I'm going to
continue working through several other matrix groups (special linear,
unitary & special unitary, orthogonal & special orthogonal), and
Sebastian will continue formalizing results about Algebras (product
algebras and I think tensor algebras).

It's actually really neat what Sebastian has done: he has formalized
an Algebra with sufficient generality that a Lie Algebra can be
defined using an attribute (`Lie` as an adjective to
`Algebra`). That's _really_ awesome! Lean cannot do that (and it's not
how Lean formalized Lie algebras), but Mizar can!

I've been thinking ahead about the unitary group. It's nominally
defined over the complex numbers, but we could ostensibly define it
over any associative unital *-algebra ("algebra with 'complex
conjugation'-like involution"). There's a "clever" way to do this with
the unitary group viewed as an _algebraic_ group. And by "clever", I
mean "nightmarish".

### What I am working on

I am returning to my formalization of matrix groups in Mizar. I was in
the middle of proving various results for perfect groups, specifically
the claim: for any normal subgroup $N$ of $G$, we have $G/N$ is
commutative if and only if the derived subgroup $[G,G]$ is a subgroup of $N$.

The goal is to prove that the elementary linear group $EL_{n}(R)$
generated by matrices of the form <span>$I+\lambda\mathbf{E}_{i,j}$</span> where
<span>$\mathbf{E}_{i,j}$</span> is the canonical matrix (with zero entries except
at $(i,j)$ where it is 1)---I was proving that <span>$EL_{n}(R)$</span> is perfect.

Also, more famously, for $n\geq3$ and for any field $\mathbb{F}$,
<span>$SL_{n}(\mathbb{F})$</span> is perfect.

The elementary linear group is interesting for people studying
algebras and matrix rings over algebras. (It's also interesting
because it's a _generalization_ of the special linear group, in the
sense that the elementary linear group is defined over any ring. The
special linear group is defined only over _commutative_ rings.)

The question people are
trying to answer is: for which commutative rings $R$ will <span>$EL_{n}(R)=SL_{n}(R)$</span>?
When $n\leq1$, they are both trivial. For $n\gt2$ and $R$ being a
field, they are equal. For $n=2$ and the ring is a field except for <span>$|R|\neq\mathbb{F}_{2}$</span> and
<span>$|R|\neq\mathbb{F}_{3}$</span>, then <span>$EL_{n}(R)=SL_{n}(R)$</span>.
Suslin published a famous paper in 1977 about when these groups are
equal, and there has been follow-up papers publishing results. 

The Special Linear group makes sense over commutative rings, since
that's when the determinant is well-defined. There is a strange
edgecase with the Quaternions, but that's because we can represent a
quaternion as a 2-by-2 complex matrix, so we get a natural inclusion
<span>$GL_{n}(\mathbb{H})\hookrightarrow GL_{2n}(\mathbb{C})$</span>,
then we can look at the preimage of the special linear subgroup
<span>$SL_{2n}(\mathbb{C})\leq GL_{2n}(\mathbb{C})$</span>
and declare it to be the "special linear group over the
quaternions". It's not, not really, just an accident. Some people have
started denoting this as <span>$SU^{*}(2n)$</span> instead of 
the more confusing notation <span>$SL_{n}(\mathbb{H})$</span>.

There is also the matter of the projective special linear group
<span>$PSL_{n}(R):=SL_{n}(R)/Z(SL_{n}(R))$</span>. It's a simple group
when $R$ is a field (and presumably for other commutative
rings). Ostensibly, we could analogously define the "projective
elementary linear group", but I am uncertain why someone would be
interested in it.

## Proof assistant progress

I have been reviewing my notes on Freek Wiedijk's [Mizar Soft Type System](https://www.cs.ru.nl/F.Wiedijk/mizar/miztype.pdf).
It's something I would like to formalize in Myo.

I've pushed out some edits to the prose on July 4th.

## Notes

I don't think I can say I am "migrating" notes anymore, per se. But I
am adding to them. The week started with iii+106 pages, and I added a
few more.

I originally intended to try to formalize natural deduction for
first-order logic in $FS_{0}$ with pen and paper. Instead, I found
myself pushed and pulled in every possible direction.

I have also added some notes about 'goals' and 'tactics' (and
'tacticals') for Intuitionistic first-order logic---not the tactics
which correspond to 'obvious' inference rules (like HOL's `ACCEPT_TAC`
and `NO_TAC`).

### Luhmann on structures and notes

I've added some notes about Luhmann's Zettelkasten method (and
Luhmann's thoughts about systems theory).

In the meantime, I have written an expedited ["getting started"](/wiki/note-taking/zettelkasten/getting-started.html)
article for how to get started quick with a paper-based Zettelkasten.

### Talcott's theory of binders

Wednesday (July 8) I have started seriously grinding through Talcott's
theory of binding structures ([`doi:10.1016/0304-3975(93)90240-T`](https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-3975(93)90240-T)).
If you ever wanted a rigorous formalization of [HOAS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Higher-order_abstract_syntax), this is the paper to read.

This is an extremely tedious paper for me to read,
I don't know why: it's fairly well written and well organized. The
first two sections are clear enough. Section 2 focuses on notions
which abstract away the underlying syntax (e.g., $bv(i)$ for the bound
variable in a binder) using something Talcott calls <dfn>Binding structures</dfn>. 

**Important:** The "lambda-c" syntax seems to be citing the wrong
paper. It is introduced or reviewed in Mason and Talcott's
"Equivalence in functional languages with effects" (1991, [ps](https://www-formal.stanford.edu/MT/91fp.ps)).

Also, read carefully the discussion of holes on page 102. It's
trickier than you think: holes carry with them the specification of
which free variables must become bound upon filling the hole. (Holes
abstract away the concept of metavariables, so they are pretty useful!)

The thing I need to bear in mind: for 'primitive constants', these
would be described as binding operations with no binding indices and no
binding relations. This appears to be how Talcott handles the
situation in Section 6.

Section 3 discusses how to [recursively] define functions on "binding
structures" (like substituting a term for a free variable, or "filling
in a hole"). The first three sections constitutes about half of the
paper (excluding the appendices). I've spent about 4 full pages
(handwritten on printer paper) reconstructing the first three sections
alone.

Section 4 focuses on a sort of term rewriting called "uniform
reduction" suitable for binding structures. This is an expedited
discussion I wish were more fleshed out.

Section 5 discusses unification for binding structures. There are two
kinds of unification discussed (one is a sort of 'first-order unification',
the other is a kind of 'higher-order unification' similar to Miller's
pattern-unification). 

Section 6 focuses on rewriting rules _more generally_ using
first-order logic as an example.

Curiously, Talcott seems to have something similar in mind as I do:
some suitably general engine for proof assistants (see, e.g.,
Talcott's [Sketch of an Architecture for Reasoning Systems](https://www-formal.stanford.edu/MT/93oafrs.ps)).

Also, the "prequel" --- Talcott's "Binding structures"
(1991, [ps](https://www-formal.stanford.edu/MT/91jmc-fest.ps.gz)) ---
is worth reading.

**Remember:** Pottier's "An overview of Cαml" points out that
Talcott's theory of binding is rather limited in situations where you
want a `let`-expression with a variable number of bound variables. I
don't think this is a "deal breaker", Talcott's binding-structures
could be "patched" to handle such a situation (of variadic binding-structures).

## Reading

I spent most of this week trying to digest Talcott's article on
binding-structures. 

I finished reading the first omnibus of Gotrek and Felix on Monday
(July 7). I'm kind of listless and not finding much interesting to read.

I've been thinking about writing a book review of Bob Doto's _A System
for Writing_, but I don't know. It delivers what it promises ("a
system for writing"), though there are some topics which the author
does not adequately discuss clearly (I believe due to "the curse of knowledge",
but it may be that I genuinely misunderstand what a 'generic reader'
means by, say, 'categories').

Oh, I also learned from Seibel's _Coders at Word_ that Knuth first
implemented TeX using pencil and "a big notebook"
in 1977. Specifically, Knuth said (p.586):

> When I wrote TeX originally in 1977 and '78, of course I didn't have
> literate programming but I did have structured programming. I wrote
> it in a big notebook in longhand, in pencil.