---
layout: wiki
title: Weekly log for 7 June 2026
published: true
date: 2026-06-07
parentURL: /weekly/
---

## Leaving town next week

I think I will be leaving town next week to visit family and friends
in Sacramento. I expect to be out of town for a week, so the next
"weekly log" may be abbreviated and late.

## Proof assistant progress

I realize I have been sitting on a few changes since May 7th, which I
have not pushed in! How embarrassing! Ah, well, I pushed them in on
Wednesday and Thursday of this week.

Also, I have found Solomon Feferman's earlier paper "Inductively
presented systems and the formalization of metamathematics"
([doi:10.1016/S0049-237X(09)70506-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0049-237X(09)70506-3), 1982)
invaluable in trying to make sense of cryptic passages of his 1989
paper on $FS_{0}$. The earlier paper was freely available online until
recently, so...there you have it...

### Characteristic functions are definable?

I have been arguing with myself about whether characteristic functions
for class-sorted terms is a well-defined notion in $FS_{0}$. 

We can try defining it by induction on the structure of class-sorted
terms, but inductively-defined classes $\mathcal{I}_{2}(A,B)$ pose a
problem for this strategy.

I vaguely recall Feferman introducing the class of derivation trees
$D(A,B)$ defined inductively as $D(A,B):=\mathcal{I}_2 (A',B')$
where 
$A'=\\{(0,x)\mid x\in A\\}$
and 
$B'=\\{((d_1, d_2), x)\mid(x,\pi_2 d_1,\pi_2 d_2)\in B\\}$
which consists of ordered pairs $(d,x)$ where $d$ is the derivation
tree for $x\in\mathcal{I}_2 (A,B)$.

At first, it seems like proving "If there exists characteristic
functions $c_{A}$ and $c_{B}$ for classes $A$ and $B$, then there
exists a characteristic function $c_{D}$ for the class of derivation
trees $D(A,B)$" by primitive recursion, but that requires a variant of
primitive recursion different from the axiom found in $FS_{0}$.

**So what?** Well, if characteristic functions are definable using
induction and primitive recursion alone, and
every class-sorted term has a characteristic function, then
class-membership is a decidable predicate and we have the theorem
$\vdash\forall C\ldotp\forall x\ldotp x\in C\lor x\notin C$ (for any
class-sorted term $C$ and for any individual-sorted term $x$, either
$x\in C$ or $x\notin C$).

### Missing Axioms

I also realized that there is an axiom missing from Feferman 1989
paper on $FS_{0}$:

$$\vdash\forall x\ldotp x=0\lor\bigl(\exists y,z\ldotp x=(y,z)\bigr)\tag{1}$$

Since $FS_{0}$ was a "pure Lisp", there are no other urelements other
than the $0$ constant, so nothing is really lost here.

Equivalently, since equality is decidable, adding the following axiom
will allow us to derive the result in Equation (1) as a theorem:

$$\vdash\forall x\ldotp x\neq0\iff\bigl(\exists y,z\ldotp x=(y,z)\bigr)\tag{2}$$

The $\Longleftarrow$ direction is obvious with the axioms found in the
paper. (Hint: its contrapositive is literally one of the axioms!) But
the forwards direction is not at all obvious (and wrong if
there are other Urelements allowed).

If we have Equation (1), then we can prove the theorem concerning the
existence of the characteristic function for derivation trees $D(A,B)$
discussed in the previous section.

### (In)efficiency concerns

It dawned on me as I was trying to sleep that the way I have
implemented first-order logic may be inefficient. It may be more
efficient to implement something like HOL's approach to higher-order
logic: use a simply-typed lambda calculus with primitive equality,
then add a `prop` (analogous to HOL's `bool`) and `term` (analogous to
HOL's `ind`) types. 

Coincidentally, this is what [Lisa](https://github.com/epfl-lara/lisa)
does --- see, e.g.:

- Simon Guilloud, Sankalp Gambhir, Andrea Gilot, Viktor Kunčak,
  "Mechanized HOL Reasoning in Set Theory".
  [arXiv:2403.13403](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.13403), 20 pages
-  Simon Guilloud, Sankalp Gambhir, Viktor Kunčak,
  "Lisa -- A Modern Proof System"
  [arXiv:2507.11167](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.11167) 19 pages;

(Lisa calls its ortholattice first-order logic $F(OL)^{2}$ but it
should really be $OLFOL$ [homonym of 'awful']. Or better, since it is
a weak ortholattice first-order logic, it's $WOLFOL$ [homonym
of 'waffle' the delicious breakfast item].)

It would be possible to have first-class schemes and
class-comprehension operators (instad of the hacks I currently have). 

But it might be too odious in other regards. For example, it would
_completely_ break Standard ML's built-in pattern matching with
formulas (which would only matter in the `Formula` module).

### Reflections on literate programming

After having written a large-ish literate program, I think one
observation worth passing along is: it pays dividends to write a
series of fairly self-contained modules or "units". In other words,
"serialize" your program like Charles Dickens serialized his books.

I say this because the XUnit testing framework (Appendix B) originated
as a self-contained vignette. As such, I could edit it down, simplify
the code, polish the prose, etc., without too much worry: it was
self-contained, almost nothing else directly depended on it. 

All I needed to do was provide a contract for how to write tests using
the `Assert` module and they had to have their type signature be
`Test.Case : string * (unit -> unit) -> Test.t`. All that was really
needed was `name : string` and `test : unit -> unit` be provided, and
I could construct a test case from these alone.

Unfortunately, there is not much else which can be so isolated as
this (in Myo, at least). I can't rewrite, say, the `Term` module with
this in mind: it's needed by too many other modules, there's no way to
isolate it to just one or two public-facing functions. Revising the
code would be, well, difficult.

## Transcribing notes

I'm continuing my migration from Forester to plain TeX, and expanding
on the material I'm including. So far I've written iii+61 pages of
notes (I started the week with iii+25 or iii+40 pages of notes).

I have added some notes about Intuitionistic first-order logic,
proving a grocery list of theorems using natural deduction.

### Structured Proofs macros

I have also written some macros (in plain TeX) for "structured proofs"
similar to Leslie Lamport's "structured proofs", but using Mizar
syntax. 

The neat thing about it is that I have the proof steps be
their own command `\Consider\ x, y, z \st\ ...`, `\Let\ $A$, $B$ be classes`
`\PerCases\ since $x\in A$ or $x\notin A$`, etc.

I also have "suppose"
be their own environment `\begin{Suppose}{$x\in A$}...\end{Suppose}`.

The outermost proof environment will also end with a QED symbol.

Some quirks: If you want to use the previous proof step as part of the
justification for the current proof step when proving a formula, then
you use the command `\ThenHave\ ...` (instead of Mizar's `then ...`). 
But when combining `then` with a proof step like `consider`, you can
write `\Then\Consider`.

There are probably other quirks I am forgetting about.

However, the implementation only uses 2 counters (whereas, I think,
Lamport's macros uses "as many counters as necessary"), which is
something I am proud of.

### Using structured proofs

I've used these macros to prove some elementary things, like the
existence and uniqueness of the empty class in $FS_{0}$, or the
existence and uniqueness of the singleton class $\\{x\\}$ in $FS_{0}$.

Even used "informally", I realize the urgency of getting something
like Mizar's "checker" working for Myo. It may even force me to
rewrite the many-sorted term and formula modules to adopt locally
nameless conventions.

### Notes on Unicode

I also have written some notes on formal languages, which led me to
talk a great deal about "alphabets" --- a critically important concept
relegated to "some countable set" in most texts. This naturally led me
to talk about ASCII and Unicode, which led me to talk about the
convoluted conceptual model used by Unicode.

It makes a certain kind of sense, but it's still rather
convoluted. Basically, you have some alphabet, then you convert it to
"code points" (some subset of the natural numbers), then you convert
it to "data units" (think of a finite sequence of integers between 0
and $U-1$), then you convert it to bytes. "It's just that simple!"

The Unicode standard is frustrating informal, unfortunately, which
led me to formalize it to some degree in my notes.

## Physics

I've been thinking again about physics, specifically about whether
there is a "suitably nice" purely Classical model of transistors and
circuits. By this I mean, it works well enough for the situation we
might find a Desktop computer working (temperature range 10-90
Celsius, standard air pressure, etc.).

I _think_ this is "device physics", but I have only heard Electrical
Engineers use the phrase "device physics".

## Reading

I finished reading R.A. Salvatore's _The Halfling’s Gem_ Wednesday (3
June). It was pleasant enough, but I was surprised reviewers praise it
as substantially different (better) than the other entries in the
Icewind Dale trilogy. For myself, the writing style was consistent, and
if I were not told of the author then I would have guessed Salvatore
wrote it.

I've been reading the first Gotrek and Felix omnibus before bed. Right
now, I am in the middle of _Skavenslayer_. "Why am I standing here
half-naked and alone, facing a pack of skaven assassins? Why do these
things always happen to me? This sort of thing never happened to
Sigmar in the legends!"

My Mom picked up a few thick fantasy books the public Library was
discarding: Terry Goodkind's _Stone of Tears_ (book 2 of "The Sword of
Truth" series), Tad Williams's _To Green Angel Tower_, and Robert
Jordan's _The Shadow Rising_ (book 4 of the wheel of time series). I'm
uncertain whether I need to read the earlier installments of
Goodkind's series (or Jordan's Wheel of Time series) for me to make
sense of these books, but at least I've got something to read.