---
layout: wiki
title: Weekly log for 28 June 2026
published: true
date: 2026-06-28
parentURL: /weekly/
---

## Mizar result accepted

I formalized the general linear group in `MATGRP_0`, the first entry in
the "Lie Miz" effort to formalize Lie theory in Mizar. 

The [preprint](https://fm.mizar.org/fm34/matgrp_0.pdf) is now
available, but it will probably be published...soon...

It took about a year since I submitted it for inclusion in the MML, so
I am pleased to see it finally accepted.

## HOL4 Documentation is now online!

I was excited to find that [HOL4's documentation](https://hol-theorem-prover.org/docs/trindemossen-2/)
is now online! 

## Proof assistant progress

Continuing from last week, I have gained greater insight into John
Harrison's `ITAUT_TAC` but I do not have an adequate explanation. This
seems paradoxical, let me justify my statement: an explanation appeals
to some theory or framework to "predict" some phenomenon. 

In particular, for this situation, an explanation should also derive
the algorithm and construct the program. I do not have an adequate
"theory-based justification" for the algorithm, but I understand the
main "moments" of the algorithm.

I also realize that I need a few more tactics, and some tacticals,
before I can implement such an algorithm for Myo. That's what I've
been working on this week.

## Note migration

I am still migrating notes from Forester to plain TeX, but it is
slowing down a bit. Right now, it is iii + 90 pages long (about 12
more pages than last week). I have made the index double columned this
week. 

I think this next week, I will focus on writing my notes about
literate programming.

### Writing about Zettelkastens and Luhmann

I got distracted thinking about Zettelkastens and Luhmann's theory of
systems. 

How many people who use the Zettelkasten method have notes _about_
their Zettelkasten? This "self-observation" seems to have been
important to Luhmann for Autopoietic systems, and Luhmann seems to
have written about his Zettelkasten _in_ his Zettelkasten.

### "Bottom up" literate 'omnibus'?

It dawned on me that it would be an interesting "literate program" to
write _everything_ in one document starting from plain TeX alone:
the TeX macros are documented before they are evaluated, the
Standard ML code is designed, and so on.

This would be a "bottom-up" style of writing (where only things
previously introduced could be used), but I do not know if it would be
as interesting to _read_.

After thinking about what Shreevatsa had said about difficulties
reading _TeX: The Program_ ("the structure of the TeX program is
bottom-up, i.e., numerous low-level details are discussed before
moving to the big picture"), I think this would be a disastrous
experiment in writing.

## Reading

I do not know what I am doing, but I have not been able to go to bed
as early as I want to. I have not been reading as much as I wish I
could. 