---
layout: post
title: smlpkg tutorial
published: true
draft: false
use_math: true
quote: "Without systematic unity, our knowledge cannot become science; it will be an aggregate, and not a system."
quoteSource: Immanuel Kant, <i>The Critique of Pure Reason</i> (1787)
tags: [Standard ML]
---

There are few package managers for Standard ML. In fact, the only one
I am aware of is [smlpkg](https://github.com/diku-dk/smlpkg) which
lacks adequate documentation.

This post just constitutes a "note to self", which I hope may be
helpful to others.

# Building smlpkg

This requires MLkit, MLton, or any other Standard ML compiler which
can work with MLton's "Basis build system".

For MLton, you have to build it using the command:

```console
~/src/smlpkg$ MLCOMP=mlton make clean all
```

Unfortunately, it does not build under Poly/ML or SML/NJ. I tried
using Chris Cannam's [sml-buildscripts](https://github.com/cannam/sml-buildscripts),
but no dice. So if you want to build `smlpkg` using `polybuild`, you
have extra work to do for yourself.

## Installing smlpkg

Assuming you somehow succeeded in building `smlpkg`...now what?

Well, if you tried `make install`, it will simply create a
subdirectory `bin/` inside the `smlpkg` directory. So, for me, it
created `~/src/smlpkg/bin/` and placed a copy of the binary `smlpkg`
there. 

You need to either place this in a place which is accessible to
`$PATH` (e.g., in `/usr/local/bin/`) or you need to add this directory
to the `$PATH` variable.

You can verify you've done this correctly by opening up a terminal,
and running `smlpkg`. You should get something like the following:

```console
alex@lisp:~$ smlpkg
Usage: smlpkg [--version] [--verbose] [--help] <command> ...:

Commands:
   add        Add another required package to sml.pkg.
   check      Check that sml.pkg is satisfiable.
   init       Create a new sml.pkg and a lib/ skeleton.
   fmt        Reformat sml.pkg.
   sync       Populate lib/ as specified by sml.pkg.
   remove     Remove a required package from sml.pkg.
   upgrade    Upgrade all packages to newest versions.
   versions   List available versions for a package.
```

# Using smlpkg

Assuming you have now built `smlpkg` and its directory is accessible
to `PATH`, how do we use it?

As I understand it, the intent is that:

- You keep your Standard ML projects in a subdirectory `$somewhere/lib/`
- You must decide the location of the parent directory `$somewhere`
  (usually it's `~`, I guess?)
- **Starting projects.**
  Assuming you have a Github username `username` and you wish to start
  a new project called `new-project`, you run the command (in the
  directory `$somewhere`) `smlpkg init github.com/username/new-project`
  + Example: if I (with username `pqnelson` on Github) wanted to start
    a project called `indexer`, then I would run the command
    ```console
    alex@lisp:~/src/$ mkdir indexer
    alex@lisp:~/src/$ cd indexer
    alex@lisp:~/src/indexer/$ smlpkg init github.com/pqnelson/indexer
    Created directory 'lib/github.com/pqnelson/indexer'.
    Wrote sml.pkg.
    ```
    This effectively creates a new empty directory `~/src/indexer/lib/github.com/pqnelson/indexer/`
    and does some book-keeping in `~/sml.pkg`
    
    Observe that the directory which contains all my source code is
    `~/src/indexer/lib/github.com/pqnelson/indexer/` --- this is
    analogous to the `src/` directory in a [Maven project](https://maven.apache.org/guides/introduction/introduction-to-the-standard-directory-layout.html).
    More importantly, `smlpkg` apparently expects to find
    `lib/github.com/pqnelson/indexer` when it tries to download a copy
    for any users of my code --- `smlpkg` **will** throw errors if it
    does not find this directory.
    
    If I want to add unit tests, I would create the subdirectory
    `~/src/indexer/lib/github.com/pqnelson/indexer/test/` which will
    then contain a `test.mlb` file, `test.sml` test runner file, and a
    `tests/` subdirectory.
  + **IMPORTANT:** You **MUST** create a `sml.pkg` file which
    initially looks like:
    ```
    package github.com/pqnelson/indexer
    
    require {
    }
    ```
    Just change the uesrname from `pqnelson` to whatever your handle
    is, and change the project name from `indexer` to whatever your project
    is called.
    
    This is an undocumented aspect to `smlpkg` and it is important to
    do, otherwise other users **will** receive errors when they try to
    add your package to their projects.
    
    (I really do not understand why `smlpkg` forces us to manage this
    file, nor why it lacks documenting the importance that this file
    exists.)
  + **IMPORTANT 2:** You **must** version your projects with tags with
    prefix `v` --- so the initial release will be `v0.0.1`; without
    the leading `v`, `smlpkg` will throw errors when other people try
    to use your package.
    
    Again, this is not well documented, and it seems like `smlpkg`
    should check for versions without a leading `v` prefix.
- **Using packages.**
  If you wish to use my fancy `indexer` package, you need to say
  `smlpkg add github.com/pqnelson/indexer` --- this will only modify
  the `~/sml.pkg` file. You also need to run the command `smlpkg sync`
  to fetch the code.

# Concluding remarks

Is this worth it? ...I feat not so much for me, but hopefully for you.

But this also leaves much to be desired, since `smlpkg` lacks the
functionality of, say, Rust's `cargo` or Clojure's `lein` (or even
Java's `mvn`).

For example, there's no way to run tests with `smlpkg`, unlike the
other tools I listed off. But `smlpkg` isn't designed to do that.

There's a lot of repetitive work involved which I would have expected
a package manager to abstract away --- for example, whenever I start a
new project, I **always** have to remind `smlpkg` I use `github.com`,
my username is `pqnelson`, and it **always** requires a
`lib/github.com/pqnelson/<project-name>` directory storing all the
source code for the project (as opposed to simply requiring a `src`
directory).

And this is entirely hardcoded into `smlpkg`, by the way.

The design decision seems well-motivated in the abstract: have a `lib`
subdirectory which stores the names of all the websites which have the
relevant git repositories, then the usernames are subdirectories of
these, and the library needed is the sub-subdirectory. This cleanly
separates out dependencies, and prevents name collisions (if the user
wanted to use both `github.com/pqnelson/xunit` and
`gitlab/some-other-user/xunit`, for some reason, then these two
packages are always separated from each other).

But it seems like forcing me to manage this in each package I develop
is foolish. Why not have a hidden directory `~/.smlpkg/cache/` which
does this for me? This avoids duplicate downloads (in case I write a
unit testing framework and use it in all my packages, for example:
`smlpkg` would download a copy for each package I develop).

I also don't understand why `smlpkg` cannot keep track of those
packages and add them to the `.mlb` build files. This would allow me
to develop a package without redundantly bloated
`github.com/pqnelson/new-package/` subdirectories.
