---
layout: post
title: Lisp as Tool
published: false
draft: true
quote: "..."
quoteSource: Author, <i>Title</i> (year)
tags: [Lisp]
---

I've been asked a few times in my personal life about programming
language recommendations. Like most engineering problems, the answer is,
"Well, what are you trying to do?" Fortran remains competitive in
numerical linear algebra, C for embedded systems, and so on.

But there is a case to be made for Lisp.

# Imagine No Syntax

What if we just adopted the grammatical convention that sentences would
be `<verb> <subject> <object>`? It'd be crazy at first, but we would get
used to it. Well, Lisp adopted this grammar. More precisely, Lisp uses
S-expressions `(<verb> <subjec> <object>)` wrapping things up in
parentheses.

The advantage is the grammar is LL(1) and easily parseable. The
disadvantage, for modern programmers, is the notation looks funny: I
want to write `object.verb(params...)` gosh-darn-it!

## What's an S-Expression?

For the sake of completeness, the grammar of an S-expression is (in
[EBNF](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extended_Backus%E2%80%93Naur_form)):

```ebnf
s-expression = list | atom ;

list = "(" {s-expression} ")" ;

atom = symbol
     | string
     | integer
     | float ;
```

Lisp treats atoms as values, and lists as linked-lists of "cons cells"
(nodes).

What is the "smallest working programming language" using these
S-expressions? Arguably, this is the minimal viable definition of a
dialect of Lisp. Usually we require call-by-value semantics.

## Implement Your Own Primitives

But there is another subtle advantage. There's no distinction between
"primitive" or "built-in" constructs from user-defined functions or
constants.

Any language feature we'd want would have to be written in this format
using _macros_. Want classes? Well, we'd have to have
`(defclass <class-name> ...)`. We could similarly implement Go-like
concurrency `(make-channel ...)`, `(async (...) ...)`, and so on.



# Lisp is a System

Richard Gabriel's [Structure of a Programming Revolution](https://www.dreamsongs.com/Files/Incommensurability.pdf)
discusses the _real_ "paradigm shift" in programming occurred in the
1990s. But it wasn't the "Object Oriented revolution", no: it was the
transition from talking about "programming systems" to "programming
languages". I make note of this because _Lisp is a programming system_.
Some excerpts from Gabriel:

> But: how fascinating! — That incommensurability could be
> real. I had lived through this micro-paradigm shift, and my
> realization came as a surprise because it explained so much
> while remaining hidden from me all these years.
>
> The real paradigm shift? _Systems_ versus _languages_. Before 1990, a
> person interested in programming could work comfortably both in
> programming languages and in programming systems, but not so easily
> after. To tell the truth, I never even noticed the different
> words—_language_ versus _system_—never attached any significance to
> the word choice until this exploration. [...]
>
> A system is a set of interacting components, though sometimes the
> interaction is in the realm of ideas—and thus a language can also be a
> system. But the usual case requires a set of actual, observable
> behavior. A real set of things doing real stuff. —Even if in a
> computer.
>
> A language is a system of signs but for the purpose of conveying
> meaning. A language is words on the page. Grammatical correctness is
> important to a language.
>
> You can see the overlap in meaning. But the difference is
> clear: systems are about things happening, and languages are
> about conveying meaning.
